[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's the taboo.
It's the taboo,
basically of all time.
>> Yeah, of all time.
>> And right now, there
are a few more taboos.
We knocked off the
taboo against sex.
>> You did, personally.
[LAUGHS]
>> Yeah, well.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Drugs, of course.
Remember how upset
society got about drugs.
>> It still is.
>> The war on drugs?
We certainly know
about that taboo.
The next thing was death.
Everybody has deep
thoughts about death.
The ultimate taboo.
>> They blew up in this
world, this psychedelic world.
I mean, it ended the 1950s.
>> It was all up for grabs.
It's hard to describe
what that felt like.
>> Leary and Alpert will be
remembered as cultural icons
of the '60s especially, and very
influential people in not only
American culture,
but world culture.
>> They are iconic figures
who stepped off the map.
They really paid heavily.
>> The use of psychedelic drugs,
such as marijuana, mescaline,
and LSD is out of control
in the United States today.
>> I knew he was an outlaw.
>> And you have to be quite
a bad-ass to get locked up
for your ideas.
>> We had a deep,
deep friendship.
But we also had a deep enmity.
>> We're all going to die.
Why not learn how to do it with
class and style and friendship
as the climactic
expression of a life.
>> What Ram Dass did for our
culture was to open up a door
of spirituality by having
surrendered so completely
to love.
>> When you walked in, there
was a flash of total joy.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, me too.
>> And love.
I don't know what
the words are, but--
>> See, in my mythology now,
I'd say you and I are connected
at a place where we both
danced through this incarnation
together, but that we have a
connection that is timeless
in another sense of that.
And we're all beings that
know each other well,
through many forms.
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think one
incarnation is wonderful.
I mean, I started out a
Jewish boy from Boston,
from psychology,
to psychedelics,
to Eastern mysticism.
And then to have
ended up Ram Dass,
just getting straight
on until it was gone.
>> Who are you?
Who am I?
It's a very difficult question.
Throughout my life,
I was infatuated
by where the action was.
I never wanted to have
power, but I wanted to--
I ran for governor once
against Ronald Reagan.
I wanted to experience the
different theaters, or stages,
or viewpoints of life.
I think I lived one of the most
interesting lives of anyone
in the 20th century.
>> In the summer of 1995,
Timothy Leary announced
to the world media that he'd
been diagnosed with inoperable
prostate cancer.
He was dying.
>> It's shocking that people
are not expected to talk about
their dying or to plan it.
It's certainly the
greatest adventure
and celebration of your life.
It should be the
process of moving on.
>> He turned it into
a theater piece.
He turned it into a poem.
He turned it into a dance.
And it's just what he did
with all the rest of his life.
It was a celebratory moment.
>> Living's a team sport.
Dying's a team sport.
Be open to new ideas.
Remember when people used to say
that LSD is an escapist drug?
>> Yeah.
I understand.
Yeah.
It's not.
It's a confrontation.
>> One thing-- LSD is dangerous,
because you can't escape--
you've got 100 billion neurons.
Yeah.
And my thing about death
is not escaping it.
I'm running toward Miss Death.
You can't turn this
over to the doctors.
You can't turn it
over to the priests.
You can't turn it over to
the medical profession.
Think for yourselves.
No government agency
or no profession
can solve these
problems for you.
I've got to do it for myself.
You've got to do
it for yourself.
And all the viewers have
got to do it for themselves.
Take charge of it.
Plan it.
Talk to your friends about it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Timothy Leary, born October
22, 1920, in Springfield,
Massachusetts, an only child.
>> And he took birth into
such an interesting tension,
in terms of, on
his mother's side,
very conservative
Irish-Catholic, very tight,
held in tight, very judgmental.
His father was a dentist.
But from the Learys,
who were kind
of a wild, Irish,
drinking, divorcing,
"going off and running
away" type family.
>> I was a heavy
reader as a child.
And I spent hours and
hours as a kid studying
the heroic, and the
interesting, and the adventures
of people who were thinking.
>> Timothy had an
extraordinarily complex mind
and subtle mind.
He liked the kind of multi-level
nature of consciousness a lot.
I mean, the fact
that James Joyce
was one of his favorite writers
is certainly a key, a blue.
And he was the
romantic Irish bard--
also the kind of
itinerant scholar,
the kind of rascally
person at the bar.
And he seemed to play
the role of a bad guy.
>> As Aldous Huxley
said, the good Dr.
Leary would serve our cause
and his own better if he could
resist his impulse to
cock snooks at authority.
There was a thing in Tim that
just liked to piss people off.
>> What he was at heart
was an Irish rebel.
>> But like a good Irishman,
he could just pull tricks out
of the bag.
And he did it continually.
>> He had a twinkle in his
eye and seemed leprechaun-ish
and mischievous.
>> Timothy's paternal
grandfather advised him to find
your own way, be one of a kind.
He acted on that guidance,
questioning authority
every chance he got.
Following in his
father's footsteps,
Leary was a genial
hellraiser as a young man.
At West Point, he was court
martialed for supplying liquor
to other cadets.
Eventually, he was
cleared of the charge
and left the academy.
Caught between the
Catholic desire to please
and a rebellious
nature that ran deep,
Tim spent his life
walking the edge
between conformity and chaos.
>> It's interesting
the things that happen.
He gets thrown out
of college for being
found in a girls' dormitory.
He gets given a jail sentence
for, originally, forty years,
and it was then
reduced to 10, for--
what-- half an ounce of grass.
And there was a thing about
Timothy about right and wrong,
that he was busy
being a bad boy,
but, in the rascally
sense, the playful sense.
Timothy was not mean-spirited.
He was absolutely
quite the opposite.
>> Richard Alpert, born April 6,
1931, in Boston, Massachusetts.
His father, George
Alpert, was president
of the New York, New Haven,
and Hartford Railroad,
co-founder of
Brandeis University,
and a trustee of the
synagogue the family attended.
Studying psychology, Dick earned
his master's from Wesleyan
and a PhD at Stanford.
He taught on the faculties of
both Stanford and UC Berkeley.
Then, in 1958, he was appointed
assistant professor at Harvard.
A hometown success
at the age of 27.
>> I kept up a front
because I'd be scorned.
You just didn't talk
about homosexuality.
My prep school-- oh, boy.
I went through hell, internally.
>> A part of it is the privilege
that he was brought into.
And part of it is the era.
It might be a key
variant in his life
that made him really move into
the position of an outlier.
>> My homosexuality set
the stage for feeling like
an outcast.
Who am I to you--
in projection?
>> Well, you are--
we don't have the words for it.
But I'd say something
like soul mate,
or good friend and
long-term friend.
I don't want to expose this man.
I mean, it's true that I'd
read more of the books.
But you were 10
times more streetwise
than I was when we met.
>> Really?
Really?
>> Yeah.
>> I always think of myself
as kind of a nebbish--
[LAUGHS] --lost
soul, very square.
And you picked me up.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> I mean, you helped me.
[LAUGHS]
>> But you were also a very
scared Jewish boy that wanted
to--
>> Yes, I was also that.
>> Yeah.
If you asked me for
the major discovery
about myself and my
life, it's the confidence
to think for myself
and to explore.
>> During the war,
Leary completed his
bachelor's in psychology and
was posted at the Army Medical
Corps hospital in Pennsylvania.
There, Tim met his
first wife, Marianne.
They were married in 1945.
He then got his masters in
psychology at Washington State.
In 1946, they moved to San
Francisco and started a family.
Leary earned his PhD and
began clinical research
at UC Berkeley.
There, he developed a definitive
test for personality assessment
and was published widely
in respected journals.
The American
Psychological Association
named his first book, "The
Interpersonal Diagnosis
of Personality," its
book of the year.
Both Leary and Marianne
were heavy drinkers.
And Marianne suffered
from severe depression.
She committed suicide
in 1955, on the morning
of Tim's 35th birthday,
after hearing that he
had been having an affair.
Marianne's death haunted Tim
for the rest of his life.
In 1958, dissatisfied
with psychology,
which had a success rate, he
thought, no better than chance,
Leary moved with his two
children, Susan and Jack,
to Florence, Italy.
There, he met David
McLellan, the director
of the Harvard Center
for Personality Research.
Leary explained that
he wanted to throw out
the old doctor-patient model
for psychological study
and get involved with
the subjects in real life
situations.
McLellan was impressed.
>> Leary was the
brightest psychologist.
But Harvard lured him
away by offering him
a three-year research project.
>> That summer, Timothy Leary
ate psychoactive mushrooms
for the first time in
Cuernavaca, Mexico.
They were offered to him
by a visiting East German
anthropologist who had heard
of their use among the Aztecs.
>> And he said,
here, take these.
They were interesting.
>> Over the next four hours,
he journeyed through his inner
landscapes and came
back a changed man.
Leary later told
Alpert that he had
learned more about
the mind in four hours
than he had in his 15
years as a psychologist.
It was 1960, and he
was 40 years old.
>> Having an open
book on research--
anything he wanted to do.
He, of course, wanted to
research these substances.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I went to Harvard, there
was another young professor who
was a very lovable,
charismatic person.
And we joined up as a time.
Richard Alpert,
who's now Ram Dass,
has been more conservative.
>> When I was at Harvard with
Timothy, I was so gung ho.
I had appointments in four
departments simultaneously,
and also research
contracts at Stanford.
>> Fantastically successful.
I mean, he had appointments
at Stanford and Harvard.
And he had a plane.
And he had a car.
And he was like a shining star.
He had tremendous charisma.
>> I was going to graduate at
Harvard between 1960 and 1964.
I had met Dick
Alpert at a party.
I found him uncomfortable
to be around.
He seemed to be not
comfortable in his own being.
>> I was like Mr. Power
Player in academia.
Timothy was way outside of that.
Of all the colleagues
around me, he frightened me
because he was so free.
He was the only consciousness
on the faculty that
hadn't been co-opted by
Harvard, that wasn't impressed
with being at Harvard.
I saw you were
laughing at the system.
And I had no sense
of humor whatsoever.
>> You're not supposed
to laugh at Harvard.
>> I know.
There was nobody else in
Harvard laughing at it but you.
I began to sense what
a visionary he was,
that Timothy had the ability
to see outside of systems.
And therefore, he could
open things to where you go,
but it would take you a
while to get there maybe.
And he was doing that for me.
>> I didn't do that.
You did.
>> But the drug--
>> You freed me, but
you gave me the drug.
You enticed-- not enticed me.
You told me what the possibility
was, and I trusted you.
>> In the fall of 1960, Leary
discovered that Sandoz Limited,
a pharmaceutical company, would
send synthesized psilocybin
to qualified researchers.
He had access to the active
ingredient of magic mushrooms.
Leary then set up
a research program
to investigate the
effects of psilocybin.
Staff members trained as
guides and took the drug
alongside volunteer subjects
in specially prepared
supportive settings.
This approach became
known as set and setting.
Careful evaluations were
made of each session.
Alpert was away at UC Berkeley,
but that Leary took psilocybin
for the first time at Leary's
house in Newton Center.
It stripped him of the various
identities he had built up
in himself over 30 years.
He wrote, "I realize
that, although everything
by which I knew myself--
even my body and
this life itself--
was gone, still, I
was fully aware."
>> As professor went, and middle
class boy went, and pilot went,
and all of my games were
going off into the distance,
I got this terrible panic.
Because, indeed, I was
going to cease to exist.
And I got the panic, which
is the panic that precedes
the psychological death.
Because indeed, Richard Alpert
was dying at that point.
And the panic was,
no, stop, stop.
I've got to hold onto something
so I'll know who I am.
And Timothy-- the
wise, old Timothy--
always says things like,
trust your nervous system.
And you at dawn went home.
>> Yes.
>> And you were shoveling--
>> Snow.
>> --the snow in front of your
mother and father's house.
And your mother said, what
are you doing out there?
>> You idiot, come in.
It's 4:00 in the morning.
Nobody shovels snow.
>> You said, I love you,
Mom, or something like that.
>> And I said, I love you.
And I went back
to shoveling snow.
You freed me, at that
moment, from my mother.
That's what you did.
>> The psilocybin project was
widely supported and above
reproach.
The drug was legally
obtained from Sandoz,
the project
authorized by Harvard.
>> I heard about these
two professors at Harvard.
They were offering
to give people
psilocybin in return
for having them
write about their experiences.
I arranged to have a
session with Richard.
I felt very
comfortable with him.
So I thought, this can only
be a positive experience.
And it really confirmed a lot
of things that I had hoped
were true, that I
had sort of glimpsed
at various times in my
life-- in other words,
that there was kind of a
larger reality than what
my everyday, humdrum
experiences were.
>> I read about mescaline, I
think after I graduated from
high school, and was
fascinated by it,
read everything I could
on it, wanted to try it.
When I got to
Harvard, Aldous Huxley
had come to MIT to give
a series of lectures
on visionary experience.
I found out that Leary and
Alpert were teaching at Harvard
and were interested in this.
So I went over.
I made an appointment,
and I met Leary.
I had a good
conversation with him.
He told me that he thought these
drugs were the most interesting
things he'd ever found.
And the potential was enormous.
He didn't see any
downside to them.
I asked him if I could be
a subject in his research.
And he told me that
they'd made an agreement
with the university that they
couldn't use undergraduates.
So I got a supply of mescaline,
independent of anything
to do with them.
I took it a number of times
with a group of friends of mine
who were undergraduates.
I had variable
experiences with it--
one quite powerful.
But I didn't know
what to do with that.
It seems to me, if I followed
the implications of that,
I would drop out of college.
And I didn't want to do that.
So I think I boxed all
that up and set it aside.
>> Branching out, the
professors organized a prisoner
rehabilitation project.
Psilocybin was given to selected
inmates at Concord State
Prison.
Their hope was to help them
break through the habits that
kept getting them rearrested.
Another famous study
had 30 seminary students
taking psilocybin at Boston
University Chapel during one
of the year's main services.
It became known as the
Good Friday Experiment.
>> There were 16 of us in this
small chapel who had ingested.
I very soon felt the
awe coming over me.
>> This was probably the
greatest Good Friday of 2,000
years.
[APPLAUSE]
>> In the spring of 1962, just
as the psilocybin project was
becoming almost manageable, a
British researcher arrived from
England with a more powerful
psychoactive drug, LSD.
Lysergic acid
diethylamide was first
synthesized by Albert
Hofmann from a derivative
of ryegrass fungus at the Swiss
headquarters of Sandoz in 1938.
Five years later,
he accidentally
got some on his
skin and discovered
its mind-bending properties
during an epic bike ride home.
[THUNDER]
>> Hofmann not only
survived the ride,
but continued as a chemist
at Sandoz for many years.
He lived to be 102.
At first, Leary
resisted the idea
of including LSD in
the Harvard project.
Researching psilocybin
was pushing administrators
far enough.
Another issue was
the reputation LSD
had of being a mind control
drug researched by the military.
But his own experience
convinced Leary
that LSD held potential
for scientific discovery
far beyond that of psilocybin.
>> The LSD was interesting.
Because when he took
the LSD, he didn't
talk for about five days.
And I got afraid
we lost Timothy.
>> It's hard to describe what
it was like taking LSD under
the set and setting
of the early '60s.
The rending away from all of
these very intense paradigms
of authority and
monotheism and culture.
>> As a good
lieutenant on the ship,
I sort of battened down the
hatches and told everybody not
to touch the stuff
and just to wait.
And then Timothy, finally,
when he was able to speak,
it was more like, wow,
or, whew, or, yes.
And then we all started.
>> Leary and Alpert saw
their research as connected
to the centuries-long use
of psychotropic plants
by indigenous people
throughout the world.
Psychedelic, from the Greek
word "psyche" and "delos,"
literally means
mind manifesting.
After their sessions,
subjects reported
many common perceptions--
barriers dissolved.
Everything seemed alive,
even inanimate objects.
They felt a oneness
with everything.
Colors and solid patterns
were transfixing, mesmerizing.
The experience seemed
to come in waves.
>> Psychotropic drugs, who
should not be recognized
as existing or valid tools,
were demonized and glorified
for the wrong
reasons in the '60s.
That's natural.
The thing is, know
what you're doing.
>> It is normal and natural
to seek altered states
of consciousness, high states.
We do it all the
time in various ways.
Drugs are one way of
getting into them.
Well, there was two
classes of psychedelics.
One is the ones
that are mescaline
and its relatives-- more
stimulants than the other ones.
The other ones,
called indoles, which
is LSD, and psilocybin,
and DMT, really
are remarkably light in their
effects on the physical body.
I think, as a group, these
drugs are very non-toxic.
The main dangers are
psychological ones, of people
becoming panicked, terrified.
But I think the positive
potentials are terrific.
>> LSD is not a drug like
alcohol or a barbiturate.
LSD is a chemical that contains
several hundred Encyclopedia
Britannicas.
So when you talk to
someone who's taken LSD,
or if you have a sitting
who's taking LSD,
his consciousness
being spun through
many, many different levels
of language, which are not
the language of English or
French or Latin, but chemical
languages of sound
and nervous system,
sense organs, which are
many millions of years old.
What's the reaction to taking
LSD if the person is unprepared
and he swallows this local
library of chemical messages?
He's confused.
He can be entranced
and delighted.
Or it can be very frightening.
>> The experiences, personally,
that I had with psychedelics
was all about opening my mind.
And it was always, for me,
about the spiritual journey.
It affected a whole
generation of people that way.
I mean, it ended the 1950s.
>> It was as though the
splitting of the atom was going
to be followed by another
kind of splitting.
But it was the breaking
open of the heart
and the opening of the mind.
>> The reason that I took LSD,
and I think many of us did,
is a hunger to be an explorer.
>> I think they made me aware
of the magic in the world,
of seeing things not just from
the scientific perspective.
They really connected
me with nature in a way
that I wasn't before.
They really showed
me the potential
of how changing things in
here changes things out there.
And that's been a
major theme of my work.
>> It's important to understand
that certain drugs really are
sacred substances.
If you are going to use
some of the sacred drugs,
you have to use them
in the right context
with the right people.
Timothy Leary and Richard
Alpert recognized this.
>> I think the early work that
they did with psychedelics was
very important.
They showed that set
and setting really
influenced the
experience greatly,
that the mindset of
the experimenters
greatly influenced the outcomes.
And they really demonstrated
positive potentials
of the use of psychedelics,
which, I think, just now,
is becoming a focus
of attention again.
>> Doctors Joan Halifax and
Stan Grof were among the first
to research the use of
psychedelics with the dying--
in their case, terminal
cancer patients in 1967.
>> In the dying process,
there's often a lot of fear.
And I think psychedelics make
it possible to step aside
from that and observe what's
happening dispassionately.
A guided psychedelic
experience in a dying person
often enables that
person to drastically cut
doses of opiates for
pain relief, which
kept consciousness clear.
It often greatly
facilitated communication
with family and friends,
where, before, there
was no honest communication
always going on.
And it made the
dying process easier.
And so it was strongly positive
results of these studies.
So I think surrounding the
use of drugs with ritual,
making the occasions
of taking them special,
paying great attention
set and setting,
is all part of minimizing
their potential for harm.
>> We used to use "The
Tibetan Book of the Dead"
as a manual for
psychedelic trips.
And that really is a
manual of leaving your body
and going into what
they call a Bardo state.
And it's a manual
for death, really.
>> Well, the drug literature,
going back to William James
and the Harvard people 100
years ago, they always said,
it's a dying experience,
it's a death experience,
that there's a classic mystic
thing of joy and wonder,
which I'm not advocating,
boys and girls.
Like anything else,
it's complicated.
I'm very cautious.
I've taken almost
every drug there is.
But the reason I can
survive as well as I do--
I'm prudent, and I'm
careful, and I try
to find out what's involved.
20 years ago, we knew almost
nothing about the brain.
Now we know 120 billion neurons.
Every neuron in your brain
has 10,000 connections.
It's going to take
us decades to begin
to understand the magnificence
and the complexity
of this brain which creates
the realities we inhabit.
>> According to Leary, we
use but a small percentage
of our nervous
system's capacity,
that we've learned over
thousands of years to restrict
the use of our brains so
we can function in society.
Psychedelics open the full
landscape of our minds.
>> It was as if all these did
was accentuate the direction
his life was always going in,
freeing himself from systems,
freeing himself from all of
the ways that our mind creates
our reality.
>> Mythic heroes travel unknown
oceans in search of adventure
and new lands.
American astronauts were
about to launch themselves
into outer space.
In the 1960s, Leary and
Alpert dedicated themselves
to exploring the
nature of innerspace.
>> That's the word
Timothy and I always used.
That's the mythic level that
Timothy and I lived at, was,
we were adventurers.
>> They averaged one LSD session
per week and took heroic doses.
They saw themselves as
psychedelic adventurers,
exploring the nature of reality,
encountering both heaven
and hell.
They openly shared the
results of their work,
encouraging others to join them.
LSD was, at that time,
still fully legal.
It was an innocent
time and a wild ride.
>> Driving up to Sandoz
in New Jersey in the huge,
black railroad limousine that
I had from my father with
railroad wheels
on the end of it.
And Timothy and I are driving up
to buy this huge amount of LSD
as Harvard professors.
There was so many
of those, just one
after another after another.
>> Ever the scientists, Leary
and Alpert published articles
in journals and delivered
papers at conferences.
The word was out.
And their program was
becoming popular--
maybe too popular.
>> It ended up so many graduate
students wanted to work with
Leary, and almost all the
other graduate professors lost
student assistants, you
see, which pissed them off,
of course.
>> Independently,
about that same time,
I had joined the editorial
board of "The Harvard Crimson,"
the newspaper.
And there were stories
beginning to go around
about the drug experiments at
Harvard and Leary and Alpert.
And I was the only person
that had knowledge of that.
And so it was logical that
I became the reporter who
dealt with that.
>> Psilocybin was to be given
only to graduate students.
But there was one slip.
>> That guy that I
turned on-- one person--
was somebody to whom
I was attracted.
>> I was in a very
difficult role in that.
For one thing, I had
taken these drugs.
I had positive
feelings for them.
But I had a kind of dual life.
I was this straight
undergraduate
who was doing this
investigative reporting.
>> I think he wrote an article
in "The Harvard Crimson"
talking about this.
And the parents of this
one boy found out about it,
and they went to the officials
at Harvard, and said,
what's going on here?
>> The dean of Harvard said,
if he didn't squeal on me,
they're not going to
give him the diploma.
>> I played a key role in
getting information which
eventually led to Alpert's
being fired in 1963.
Leary was never fired.
He quit voluntarily.
That story was front page
news on "The New York Times."
And I think that was
probably the first time
that most Americans had ever
heard of psychedelic drugs,
or LSD, or mushrooms.
So I do think that whole episode
is what exploded this out
of Harvard, into the
nation and the Culture
>> Of course, this was a bit
of a shock, to put it mildly,
to Richard, who had been the
one who was on the tenure track.
And he had his career all sort
of mapped out, he thought.
>> You were on the tenure track.
>> I know I was.
And you laugh.
>> If it weren't for
me, you would be a--
>> I'd be somebody today.
>> --retired Harvard--
>> You blew me apart.
>> I know it.
>> I would have been
something today.
>> Yeah.
I ruined your academic career.
>> You did.
You absolutely did.
What happened was,
you were the one
that showed me that it
was possible to escape
from the system.
You really did.
It's been hard for me
to really understand
how I was ready to hear that.
>> Yeah.
>> You know?
>> Timothy's contract at Harvard
ended soon after Dick was fired
in the spring of '63.
They desperately
wanted to continue
their work, which was becoming
highly controversial, but still
legal.
Where could they go?
>> Just by chance, my brothers
inherited quite a bit of money.
And they had decided, with this
money, as a good investment,
to buy this huge property
in Millbrook, New York.
On the property with
an old house there
that was the original house.
And it belonged to the person
who developed the property back
in the late 19th,
early 20th century.
I kind of wanted it to
be haunted, you know?
It was huge, and lots of
turrets and curved glass.
It was really beautiful.
And so I talked to my brothers.
They weren't going to use it.
And they said,
sure, we'll rent you
the house for a dollar a year.
>> With Tim's children Susan and
Jack and a potpourri of friends
and acquaintances, the two
men launched into a life
of communal living.
That fall, President John
F. Kennedy was assassinated.
[GUNSHOT]
The decade had taken
a very nasty turn.
At Millbrook, the scientists
continued their research
into 1964, adapting
the old house
to its hipper inhabitants.
It soon became a second home
to artists and academics,
musicians and scientists.
Meanwhile, on the west coast,
the '60s were heating up.
The free speech
movement in Berkeley
began a reinvigoration
of democracy
that would lead to the
Summer of Love in 1967.
LSD, acid, was
often shared freely.
Years later, it became
known that the CIA ran
secret experiments with
LSD in the 1950s and 1960s,
hoping to find a way to
use the drug in warfare.
Inevitably, some
of their subjects
began using the
chemicals on their own.
Ken Kesey had first taken LSD
as part of a CIA-funded research
project while working
in a mental hospital.
Later, he and the
Merry Pranksters
held acid tests, giving
LSD to hundreds, much
to the dismay of the
scientists at Millbrook.
>> I have never urged
indiscriminate use of LSD.
And I have never
propagandized for LSD.
Strangely enough,
my position on LSD
is exactly that of the President
Johnson administration.
I believe that the
present laws which
penalize sale and
manufacture of LSD are right.
>> Meanwhile, I'm hearing out
of west coast that they were
filling a bathtub full of LSD
and feeding it to anybody that
wanted to come in and drink as
much as they wanted and playing
crazy music for them.
And I thought, this
was fucking drug abuse.
>> The use of psychedelic drugs,
such as marijuana, mescaline,
LSD, is out of control in
the United States today.
>> Over four years of communal
living at Millbrook and scores
of shared psilocybin
and LSD sessions,
Leary and Alpert developed
a close and trusting
relationship.
Richard took on a
domestic, motherly role,
becoming closer to Timothy's
children than Tim was himself.
>> And I got into the really
conscious thing in my mind that
I could justify my life
being a support system
for Timothy's vision
to find expression.
So it meant raising money.
It meant raising children.
It meant cooking.
It meant getting housing.
It meant moving Jeeps
and stuff to islands
we were being thrown off.
I mean, it was incredible.
It meant setting up foundations.
It was all the public
relations stuff
to try to keep the game
from getting out of hand.
>> Richard, do you know
how to operate this?
>> In December 1964,
Leary married again.
>> The two studs
come in the front.
So this goes in the back.
You need a stud.
>> Where is the stud?
Gunther, you got the studs?
>> Yeah.
They're over there.
>> Peggy Hitchcock had
introduced him to the beautiful
fashion model Nena,
and they fell in love.
>> Remember as much of
the vows as you can.
>> Yes, sir.
>> And I will.
>> I will.
>> They were married at a
chapel in the nearby town.
Dick was best man.
[CHURCH BELLS RINGING]
Timothy and Nena set
off on a world tour,
visiting Japan and
India in a quest
for spiritual understanding.
But by the time they
returned to Millbrook,
their marriage was over.
Leary would eventually
marry five times.
His best efforts never went
into sustaining relationships.
>> In his life, there was a big
disconnect between his heart
and his mind.
And his mind was
completely in charge always
and the heart kind
of got left behind.
>> Intimacy.
They wanted
psychological intimacy.
He was offering a
different kind of intimacy,
which is the kind of
intimacy he and I had,
which is the intimacy
of shared awareness.
That kind of thing.
He didn't get as deep
into psychodynamic stuff.
I mean, here he
was, a psychologist
who had created a
very, very highly
regarded diagnostic
psychological inventory
for assessing personality.
The reason he was
so good at that
is because he was
outside of that.
That domain or that
plane of consciousness
didn't engage him, so that
most of the women around him
were always disappointed.
>> Now you put the tie, and
then you fold that thing over.
>> Tim's friendship with
Dick also grew rocky.
Theirs had been like a
marriage, at least in some ways.
>> My capacity to be in that
relationship to Timothy,
part of it, I'm sure,
arises from the fact that
I'm basically gay.
And my relation with Timothy
was never physical love.
But there was a love
affair going on.
I mean, we loved each other.
We really loved each other.
And I became very trustworthy
for Tim to push against,
to lean on, in a way,
to get further out.
And Timothy was taking
me out with him.
Going out with him
wasn't all fun and games.
I mean, it was extremely scary.
Because I had grown up in a
family that treasured antiques,
for example, so that my
apartment in Cambridge,
when I was a Harvard
professor, was
full of absolutely beautiful
antiques, highboys.
And then I moved
to Millbrook where
it was monkeys, and aardvarks,
and cats, and six dogs,
and many children.
I mean, we were in a
63-room house, you know?
And I watched my
antiques, one by--
I didn't have the intelligence
to just sell them, you know?
[LAUGHS] I watched them all just
be destroyed before my eyes.
It was undercutting
something very deep in me.
Then, as the years went
on, something very profound
happened.
Because I started to
distinguish between visionary
and revolutionary, and
that Timothy was both.
And I loved the visionary part.
And what I saw was that the
revolutionary part of it
was costing so much,
psychically, and financially,
and socially, and everything.
We were $50,000 in debt.
And no matter how hard I
tried, I couldn't pay it off.
And we were getting further
and further out all the time
as we got thrown out of
more and more countries.
I thought, as much
fun as it was,
now it was no
longer so much fun.
And the other part of it
was, being in a relationship
with somebody that
way, ultimately,
that other part of
you never develops.
And I realized that I was
a more creative person
than this situation
was allowing me to be.
And at that point,
I think that's when
we started to pull apart.
>> In the fall of 1965, Richard
Alpert left Millbrook for good.
The awakenings that psychedelics
provided him never lasted long.
Alpert and others
hungered for a way
to maintain and
integrate expanded states
of consciousness.
>> Eventually, the world of
mind-manifesting substances
became more like decoration.
In this era of the civil rights
and the anti-war movement,
I realized that, to be
engaged politically,
I had to also be engaged
with my own mind.
And I just wanted to really
train my mind be very, very
stable and to be
able to perceive
my own mental continuum clearly
and not have it so decorated.
>> As Alpert was leaving, Leary
began a new relationship with
Rosemary Woodruff.
They closed up the
house at Millbrook
and began a trip to Mexico with
Tim's children, Susan and Jack.
But at the border
crossing in Laredo, Texas,
they were arrested for the
possession of less than half
an ounce of marijuana,
for which Leary received
a jail sentence of 30 years.
They returned to Millbrook and
began fighting the conviction.
Ultimately, the Supreme Court
overturned the sentence.
But Nixon was not satisfied
with that outcome.
Leary was indeed
later jailed, but
for interstate transportation,
not possession.
>> You're not going to solve
these problems by putting
leading scientists like myself
in jail for 30 or 40-year
prison terms for doing nothing
more than attempting to use
and understand these new forms
of energy for which yet there
is no evidence that we've
done any damage to society
or to ourselves or
to other people.
>> In 1966, drug use of
all kinds was on the rise
in America.
Even though his views
were controversial,
Leary was invited to
testify before Congress.
>> We have been told today and
we read in the papers reports
from sociologists that
from between 15% to 50%--
and in some cases, up to 65% and
70% of our college students--
are experimenting with these
mind-opening chemicals.
And I recommend, respectfully,
to this committee
that you consider
legislation which
will license responsible
adults to use
these drugs for
serious purposes,
such as spiritual growth,
the pursuit of knowledge,
or in their own
personal development.
To obtain such a license,
the applicant, I think,
should have to meet
physical, intellectual,
and emotional criteria.
>> Your testimony I
understand extremely clearly.
And it's coming more
clear now that you
feel that there shouldn't
be an indiscriminate--
indiscriminate
possession is something
that you do not support.
>> For six years, sir, I
have been indiscriminate use.
>> I know.
Indiscriminate use, all right.
>> And he felt very strongly
that he would be able
to convince Congress that
psychotropic drugs be given
over to the medical profession
for healing purposes.
[KNOCKING]
>> Police officer.
Open the door.
>> And he knew that, the minute
they decided to make this a law
enforcement issue, it
would be everywhere.
There would be no stopping it.
Everybody would be
able to get hold of it.
That was terrible for him.
That's where he developed
a very strong rebel
side towards the government.
>> As Leary continued fighting
the government and the Texas
courts, the direction of Richard
Alpert's life changed forever.
He had left the country in
1967 on a trip through Asia.
One day, in Nepal, he
met a young Westerner
who had adopted the ways of
the Indian ascetics known
as sadhus.
Bhagavan Das seemed to embody
what Richard was looking for.
So he abandoned his
first-class junket,
and, together, they descended
barefoot into India.
Before long, Richard
was introduced
to the Indian saint
who would become
his guru, Neem Karoli Baba,
known to his followers
as Maharaj-ji.
Maharaj-ji gave Richard his
spiritual name, Ram Dass,
which means "servant of God."
>> My guru is about
a 70-year-old man.
I don't know anything
about him, really.
I don't even know that he
exists, to tell you the truth.
But it seemed to
me that there was
a little old man in a blanket.
And when I looked at him, the
first time I looked at him,
I thought I wasn't
going to be hustled.
And the second time I looked
at him, all I wanted to do
was touch his feet.
I looked up, and he was looking
at me with unconditional love.
And I had never been looked
at with unconditional love
by anybody.
I felt love.
And I felt something
happening in my heart.
>> Ram Dass studied yoga and
meditation before returning
to America a changed man
>> Timothy trained me in
the beginning of my escape.
And Maharaj-ji then
took over, really.
I see them as my two
powerful teachers in escape.
>> And he comes back.
And he's maybe 80
pounds lighter.
And he's putting on a
lot of holy man airs
that are particularly
grating, having seen him
in his previous manifestation.
And I'm thinking,
same guy, new shtick.
>> Encouraged by Maharaj-ji,
Ram Dass explored his Indian
awakenings in the
book "Be Here Now,"
which became a manual for
spiritual seekers throughout
the world.
It was first published
in 1971, hand-stamped
and inked at the Lama
Foundation in New Mexico.
Originally a limited edition
with hand-stitched pages,
it is now in its 43rd printing.
>> "Be Here Now" was seminal.
It's still seminal.
It's still opening up
young people's minds.
They get that book, and it does
what it did to us so long ago.
It's amazing.
Ram Dass was a bridge
between east and west
and was a major person to open
this gateway to Eastern wisdom
to Western culture.
>> You can tell me.
Where'd "Be Here Now" come from?
That was you.
>> "Be Here Now?"
>> Yeah.
You've heard of
that, haven't you?
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> You invented that.
>> But it was really
actually Bhagavan Das.
Every time my mind would go
off into my Jewish neuroticism,
he'd say, look, just come
back here, and be here now.
So I took it as a title,
but he used to say it to me.
>> Since then, Ram Dass has
traveled and taught widely,
written numerous books, and,
putting spirit into action,
co-founded service
organizations.
>> I'm going to run for the
governorship of the state
of California.
>> In 1968, Leary was
again busted for pot,
this time by the California
State Police during his
abortive run for governor
against the incumbent Ronald
Reagan.
He had the support of
people like John Lennon,
who wrote the Beatles tune "Come
Together" for the campaign.
[MUSIC - THE BEATLES, "COME
TOGETHER"]
>> (SINGING) Come together
right now over me.
>> Named the most dangerous man
in America by President Richard
Nixon, Leary insisted the
marijuana found in his car had
been planted.
>> One evening, I
was in a parked car.
And a policeman
came up to the car
and opened the door
against my wishes.
He made a pass at the
ash tray and said,
you're under arrest for--
I said, for what?
He said, for marijuana.
What marijuana?
He reached in his
pocket and pulled out
two joints I'd never seen
before-- half joints.
And then it was like,
you're under arrests.
[CELL DOORS SLAMMING]
>> He was finally
jailed in 1970,
one of the first casualties
of the war on drugs.
But when he was given the
very personality assessment
he had himself devised
at Berkeley in the 1950s,
he got himself assigned to
a minimum security prison.
Then he escaped, with the aid
of the Weather Underground
and the Black Panthers.
>> Comment on your plans now.
>> My plans are to work
with the Black Panther Party
for the overthrow of
the American government.
>> When we crossed
paths in Algeria,
he didn't look like he
was having that much fun.
Eldridge Cleaver looked
definitely distressed.
And it didn't look like they
were enjoying each other.
But I think Tim played
with every edge.
>> He spoke about his life
in terms of being imprisoned
and escaping.
So he said that
he was in prison,
and he escaped, and
he went to Algeria
with his wife, Rosemary.
And once again,
he was in prison,
and he needed to escape.
And then he went to Switzerland.
And once again, instead
of being imprisoned
by Eldridge Cleaver
and his politics,
then he was imprisoned by a
gangster and his machinations.
Rosemary left him while
they were in Switzerland.
I think he was very
sad about that.
And I think he
absolutely adored her.
Who Timothy Leary was
for me, in the beginning,
he was just a song
of the Moody Blues.
[MUSIC - THE MOODY BLUES,
"LEGEND OF A MIND"]
>> (SINGING) Timothy
Leary's dead.
No, no, he's
outside, looking in.
>> Little by little, I sort of
got this romantic image that
this Timothy Leary might
be the king of outlaws.
Through a series of
extraordinary coincidences,
I met Timothy Leary
in Switzerland
and found out that he was
a fugitive from prison.
I was 26 years old, and I
found that very exciting.
It felt like it was my
destiny to meet him.
And I was ready for
anything with him.
We flew to Afghanistan
from Vienna.
When we got to the
airport in Afghanistan,
an attache at the
American embassy
stole our passports
out of Timothy's hands,
and this incredible
ordeal started.
I was taken with him
back to California,
where I'd never been.
It was a perfect
PR coup for Nixon.
Two days before
the inauguration,
we got brought back in front
of hundreds of journalists.
So Nixon had the front page--
Timothy Leary
brought into custody.
[GAVEL BANGING]
He was in Folsom
Prison for a year.
[CELL DOOR SLAMMING]
>> For those of
you who know him,
he's relaxed and he looks well.
But behind the camera sits the
warden, the assistant warden,
and probably the
captain of the guard.
I am Joanna Leary, and
I'd like to see him out
of here as quick as possible.
>> What do you think
of your future?
Do you think you're going
to walk out of Folsom Prison
a free man one day?
>> I think my future is very
interconnected with the future
of this country.
You just can't keep your
philosophers in prison.
If I am kept in
prison, it's going
to be a very bad symptom
for freedom, and for hope,
and for union.
>> I began to see this man come
out of his solitary confinement
cell, somewhat
confused, very red eyes.
He told me that they probably
fed him drugs in the food
they were giving him.
They let me visit him when
he was in a padded cell,
using a straitjacket.
His head was shaved.
And he began to
change in the sense
that there was less
and less and less
of Timothy Leary on the outside.
Isolation is not only to
keep somebody in a box,
but it's so they
unlearn to communicate
with the outside world.
>> Criminalizing use
and possession of drugs
doesn't work.
And it makes everything worse.
I don't think we can suddenly
legalize things overnight.
I believe in education as the
key to rational drug policy.
And that means being honest
about their positive effects as
well as negative effects, being
honest about the drugs whose
use we not only
tolerate, but promote,
like alcohol and tobacco,
and that we make money from,
our government makes money from.
So it's real education,
truthful education.
And I think it has to be
at all levels of society.
Timothy decided to turn
state and federal evidence
so he would get out of prison.
The next morning, the
feds came and said,
we've received news that people
want to kill you, both of you.
And so you have to go into the
Witness Protection Program.
Timothy insisted that
they bring us to Santa Fe.
Our names were changed
to James and Nora Joyce.
We were two drunks,
lost in the wilderness,
trying to encounter each other.
The loneliness, the
separation, the isolation
had driven my alcoholism
and my drug addiction
to an excruciating place.
And so we fought a lot.
We had both suffered so much.
And from where I
look at it right now,
I think that the right move
for him was to blame me.
>> In the end, Leary spent
almost four years in jail,
of which two and a half were
in solitary confinement.
But no matter how dark
the circumstances,
he always remembered that
Marshall McLuhan had advised
him to wave reassuringly,
radiate courage,
and you must be
known for your smile.
>> I've been in 40 jails
in four continents.
>> [LAUGHS] I haven't
even been busted yet.
[LAUGHTER]
>> The proliferation of LSD,
and psychedelics, and marijuana,
even, within popular
culture was a Pandora's box.
The second youth
culture got ahold of it,
it exploded, much greater
than anybody knew it would,
much greater than
he knew it would.
>> Tim really was
naive, innocent.
He did not anticipate
the kind of reaction.
>> Nevertheless, Leary
is often solely blamed
for their popularization
and misuse.
>> As that poisonous, evil man,
Dr. Timothy Leary, has said,
it is a way to turn on,
tune in, and drop out.
>> People say, you ruined
an entire generation.
And I go, but that's
72 million people.
They said, yeah.
They say, don't you feel regret?
And I say, well,
one thing I feel--
only 100,000 of
them had the decency
to thank me for
ruining their past.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Turn on to the internal
neurological energy.
"Tune in" means to harness
up the new revelation
and energy in your life.
And drop out-- now this may
sound reckless advice today,
but it's the oldest
advice that philosophers
and religious leaders
have passed on.
Detach.
Drop out.
Find what's within.
Turn on, tune in, and drop out.
And I stand by that statement.
[CHANTING]
>> Over time, Leary
was dismissive of Dick
Alpert's spiritual journey,
which he saw as his merely
playing lieutenant to yet
another prophetic master.
>> Leary did not
like gurus, period.
>> Timothy seemed quite
comfortable with the metaphors
of the religious traditions.
But later, those became grist
for the mill of his revolution
also.
And he treated me like sort of
an old-fashioned type person.
>> Once Leary's long struggle
with the FBI and the Justice
Department was concluded, he
settled in Los Angeles with his
fifth wife, Barbara Chase,
and her son Zachary.
>> Timothy Leary married my
mother when I was four years
old.
And he was the father who
raised me from ages four
until 22, until he died
when I was 22 years old.
So I lived with
him for 17 years.
And somebody pointed
out to me once
that I have the
great distinction
of living with him longer
than anybody else did, ever.
So he was just a great, very
kind of standard white picket
fence father with me.
And most people don't know that.
And when I tell people that,
it's really a surprise.
He took me to Little
League practice.
He played baseball
with me in the yard.
We went to Dodger
games all the time.
He made sure I did my homework.
I mean, it was
shockingly normal.
>> After some years
of estrangement,
Leary and Ram Dass's love for
each other as mythic explorers
guided their reconnection.
>> The last 20 years
have been remarkable.
They have put us
through the changes.
And we've put them
through some changes.
[LAUGHS]
>> He didn't ask me for
legitimacy of his life,
and I didn't ask him
for legitimacy of mine.
That allowed a new
kind of respect
to emerge between us,
which was interesting.
It was a respect that
honored our differences,
rather than the adventure
of sharing an idea.
And I really felt that Timothy
really respected me at the end.
And I certainly respected him.
>> The question of
"am I afraid to die"
is something that I
actually live with everyday.
>> I think everybody
is afraid to die.
The question is, how do
you deal with the fear?
>> I like being alive.
I like this incarnation.
I'm attached to it.
>> If I weren't afraid to
die, I would not be taking it
seriously.
In some ways, I think death is
the most important experience
that you're preparing
for all your life.
>> Why is it so important
to talk about death?
It's the unspoken
phobia of the culture.
You can see it if you look at
the major issues like abortion,
death penalty,
euthanasia, terrorism.
It all concerns
this issue of death.
>> When I discovered
I was dying,
and I knew I was going to
die actively and creatively,
I called Ram Dass, because
I knew he would understand.
That's the galley of some
book I wrote years ago.
He's a wise friend and a
loving, protective friend
over many years and
many experiences.
>> Tim and I, in
1963 with Ralph,
were doing "The
Psychedelic Experience,"
which was a manual based on
"The Tibetan Book of the Dead."
And that led to a pretty
deep study of psychedelics.
And since we were
both dealing with what
we considered psychological
death and rebirth,
and we had been through those
death-rebirth experiences
many times together,
it's reasonable for him
to think of me as somebody
who would understand
what this death experience
was going to be like for him.
[GUTTURAL SINGING]
>> "The Psychedelic Experience"
was the first modern book
to provide a map for
mind-expanding drug sessions,
much as "The Tibetan
Book of the Dead"
provided advice for traveling
through after-death states,
known to Tibetan
Buddhists as bardos.
>> "Bardo" actually
means "in between."
This is a bardo too.
We are in the bardo of life.
They were talking about
the bardo connected
to "The Tibetan
Book of the Dead,"
the bardo between
death and rebirth.
And they identified
LSD as a vehicle
to pre-experience what
that would be like.
>> Long before I
knew I was dying,
we were using this metaphor
of leaving your body,
leaving your mind, and
contacting a different level
of altered states,
expanded consciousness.
So my life has
prepared me for this.
>> I've seen so many people
die clinging to the past,
and also worried
about the future.
I think this is the moment.
That's what I got,
is this moment.
And one of these
moments, I'll be dead.
And that'll be the moment.
>> In 1977, Ram Dass founded
The Dying Project with Stephen
and Ondrea Levine
and Dale Borglum.
He's been a kind of midwife to
the dying since 1963, offering
wisdom, compassion, and his
knowledge of other planes
of consciousness.
>> Ram Dass was the pioneer.
He's the person who
really opened up
that field, for me personally.
>> The amount of cost in
keeping people alive--
forget quality of life
now, just physically alive.
The Intensive Care Unit strategy
was finally prohibitive.
It was getting prohibitive.
It was just eating
up all the resources.
Then comes the hospice
movement, which says, oh, well,
what we've missed is that the
psychological part of dying
is also important.
And hospice is much cheaper
than intensive care units.
Well, all it requires is
that we accept the fact
that death exists.
And that's a big shift,
to accept death existing,
versus, it's a
failure and an enemy.
>> What Ram Dass did was
really inspire people to bring
spirituality and existential
questions into their awareness
so that they could not only
die well, but also live well.
>> I do a lot of grief
work with people.
And what I often
am finding myself
saying to people who have lost
their child or their spouse
after many years or something--
you will grieve, and
grieve, and grieve,
and you'll come up for air,
and think it's all over,
and I'll be strong.
And then you'll go
back under, and you'll
go through depressions.
And let it all run its course.
Don't push it.
Your mind will
recite all the ways
you've lost the person,
that you'll never
have the smell of their
body, all these things.
Milk it all.
Don't push it away.
But there will come a time
when your mind will quiet down
a little bit.
And in the quietness
of that moment,
the love that you ever
tasted with that person
will be living and present.
And then you'll realize
that what the essence was
that made you connect
with this person
has nothing to do with death.
That love transcends
death, basically.
But you're going to have to
find it out for yourself.
But it's true.
>> I had this tragic loss.
I had the great love of
my life drop dead on me.
I was getting this
huge overflowing
of love from other people.
And it was absolutely useless.
I felt like a black
hole for love.
It didn't make any difference
what everybody said.
They didn't understand
what it felt like.
And then I felt like they
were wasting their love on me,
which is a terrible feeling.
And I mentioned
this to Ram Dass.
I said, I feel like
a bottomless well.
You know what I mean?
Love goes in, and you never
hear anything hit bottom.
And he said, well,
consider the possibility
that it's not bottomless,
that it's very deep--
sorry-- and that, one day,
it will fill it with love.
And all that still--
[CLEARS THROAT] --it
still kind of gets me.
>> Death and someone dying is
an initiation that we as human
beings go through.
And it enriches us.
It deepens us.
It opens our hearts.
It's a terrible thing.
But I think it makes us
bigger, and deeper, and more
compassionate as people.
>> I found out I had
cancer about a year ago.
But the real pressure of it,
the symptomatic pressure of it,
is just in the last
two or three months.
I've had moments of deep pain.
I've had moments when the
pain pills would almost
knock me out.
And I was a source of
worry to my friends,
because I was suffering so much.
And it's been a shock to me
to discover that pain exists,
and it can really dominate
your consciousness.
So I've had to
work that through.
>> See, the issue is
pain and consciousness,
the relation of pain
to consciousness.
Because when you're looking at
it from just the physical body,
the goal is to get rid of as
much pain as possible, even
if you have to put
the person to sleep,
keep them asleep until they die.
That's the most
humane thing to do.
Here we are six years later.
And I've had a stroke,
five years ago.
I don't remember time.
But this is now '03.
>> In February 1997, Ram
Dass suffered a severe stroke
and a massive
cerebral hemorrhage.
Doctors gave him only a
10% chance of survival.
Hundreds of hours
of rehabilitation
later, he was still partially
paralyzed, though able
to get around in a wheelchair.
After years of service,
he had to learn
to accept the help of others.
>> I am more now identified with
my soul and more compassionate
to my body.
See, I don't know how I'll
be if I'm in your situation.
At this moment, I
don't feel anxious
at all about my
life or anything.
>> Anything, yeah, yeah.
>> The stroke was so painful
that I pushed it away by going
to the witness in the soul, just
witnessing the stroke rather
than experiencing the stroke--
what a psychologist
would label dissociation.
Sure.
Yeah!
[LAUGHS]
My pains I treat lovingly.
Pain is a worthy adversary.
We're going to have
to fight it out.
>> He has been through a lot.
It's interesting to be with him.
Because there's an absence
of self-pity there.
And the fact that he's been
in that chair for 15 years,
I mean, that is no joke.
He's over 80 now.
That's really remarkable
that he's lived so long.
It's a testimony to his
delightful determination
that I think is a kind
of model for all of us.
There's something
about his essence
which has not changed at all.
I really feel it's love.
>> Ram Dass now lives in
Hawaii, cared for by a community
of loving friends and students.
>> Ah!
>> Woo-hoo!
Woo!
>> He's more active than ever,
teaching, writing, counseling,
and appearing virtually.
>> My body is 80 years old.
I am a soul.
>> Although still
physically restricted,
he continues his work,
furthering the vision he
pioneered with Timothy Leary
more than 40 years ago.
Adding to his personal legacy
is a son, Peter Reichard.
Ram Dass was introduced
to him in 2009.
It was a shock to both of them.
>> Wow.
In a million years!
Of all the crazy things.
And what a great
guy, Peter, his son.
>> Peter had never
heard of Ram Dass,
let alone that he was
his biological father.
Long ago, Richard Alpert
had a brief affair
with Peter's mother
while teaching
at Stanford, before his Harvard
years with Timothy Leary.
Peter was the result. But his
mother had moved back east
and never told Richard.
Now, more than 50
years later, Ram Dass
finds himself connected to
a new and growing family
in the final years of
his current incarnation.
>> The amazing thing--
the great singular
accomplishment
of Ram Dass's life, I
think, is that, setting up
from not very
promising beginnings,
he has become a truly
wise person, deeply.
>> If you see that the moment
of death is the moment when you
engage in the deepest
mystery of the universe--
and that's what the whole
Eastern traditions are about,
preparing you for that moment,
so that you will be equanimous.
You will be curious.
You'll be present.
You'll be non-clinging to
the past and not grabbing.
Just be with each
moment, moment by moment.
Some people do some of their
most profound spiritual work
in the last few minutes
before they die.
>> Wanting to get a head start--
why leave it to
the last minute--
Timothy Leary at 75
approached his final days
with characteristic enthusiasm.
He promised to give death a
better name or die trying.
>> We're all going to die.
Why not learn how to do it with
class and style and friendship
as the climactic
expression of a life?
The last week, I have
not been using any pills.
And it's been a fascinating and
wonderful experience-- so far.
I've become very
friendly with my cancer.
And also, I say in public, my
cancer I see now as my teacher.
And I try to talk to her.
And I say, Miss Cancer--
I say, we're in it together.
>> [LAUGHS] Yeah.
If you go, it goes.
>> We're both stuck
in the same body, see?
>> Yes, exactly.
>> So let's make a deal.
[CHUCKLES] Let's keep the
body alive a little while,
and we can have more fun.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> When the heart waves
flatline, the brain goes on.
They call it the
sliver of opportunity.
Your life flashes
in front of you.
>> And you go into ecstasy.
>> The light at the
end of the tunnel?
>> Sure, sure.
>> Yeah, that's all comes
from near-death experiences.
The brain is happy.
Because then the
brain is in the states
that the Buddhists talk about.
It's pure consciousness.
>> Sure.
It's extricated itself
from all the senses.
>> Yeah.
But see, that 15 minutes is
timeless, like an LSD session.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> You go through 95
lifetimes in death.
>> Well, every
minute is timeless.
>> There you go, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Like everybody
else, I'm speculating.
And I may change.
I'm trying to learn.
>> This period that
Timothy Leary speaks about,
this 15 to 20-minute period,
what that would be called
in the Tibetan teaching is
still the process of dying.
So you're not dead yet.
But the gross body is
dead, but the subtle body
is still remaining in the body.
So that's what he's identifying.
>> At this period
in human history,
we're lucky enough to be here
when, for the first times,
science is developing ways to
keep you alive or to bring you
back.
The church has said, no,
you have no right to take--
your body belongs to God.
Well, show me the paperwork.
[THUNDER]
>> By 1993, Timothy and
Barbara had divorced,
although Tim remained
close to her son Zach.
>> He had a lot of personal
heartache in his life.
His wife Marianne
killed herself.
And every marriage
ended in divorce.
His daughter Susan
also committed suicide.
And Jack didn't speak to him.
So there was a lot
of heavy stuff going
on there, a lot of
heavy karmas and a lot
of interpersonal relationships
that he just really
couldn't work out.
And I think that
really broke his heart.
And there was no question that
him getting to raise me again
was a chance for him
to do it over again.
He had an uncanny knack
to reinvent himself.
Especially in the late
'80s and into the '90s,
he was much more of
a cyber culture icon
than he was a '60s hippie icon.
And that's why he kept
young people around,
because he was so fascinated
with youth culture,
and with computer
culture, and early
internet culture, and cyberpunk
culture, and music culture,
and art.
>> Every technique that science
has now for bringing you back
I've been signed up with.
[THUNDER]
I'm going to have my blood
cells available for cloning.
[EXPLOSION]
>> It's inconceivable to me
that Timothy could have taken
as much acid as he's taken
and been through as much
as he's been through and end
up a philosophical materialist
in which, when the body
is dead, you're dead.
Yet that's what he professed.
Why did it end up that
you're interested in things
here and now, and I'm interested
in lala land all the time?
Why is that?
>> You're not really.
>> I am.
I am.
>> What do you mean?
What's lala land?
>> Well, I'm interested in the
awareness that happens after
the brain gets eaten.
When I think about
the moment of death,
I usually think of
a great acid trip.
I think of the dissolution
of conceptual structures.
I have, under my
personal supervision,
witnessed over 3,000
injections of LSD.
>> Over 3,000.
Well, can you briefly
describe the effect of it?
>> [LAUGHS] No, sir.
You might say I
was sitting there,
and suddenly, I
began to dissolve.
Every cell in my body
began to break down.
And it was though
I was afraid I'd
become a puddle on the floor.
Then I saw a huge
serpent coming up.
The serpent swallowed me.
I went into the
serpent's stomach.
Later, I was excreted,
and I exploded.
Then--
>> You see Teddy Kennedy there.
It's like, oh, my gosh.
These guys must have been
having their own little mental
breakdown listening to him.
>> And by this time,
even the most experienced
and hard-bitten psychiatrist
is likely to be crouching under
the table and saying, in
30 years of my practice,
I've never listened to anything
so frightening and so far out.
Now, actually, if you told
this story to a Hindu,
he'd say, oh, yes, the
third dream of Vishnu.
Oh, yes, that's just like the
11th chapter of "The Bhagavad
Gita."
But we also have neurological
and anatomical explanations
for the so-called
hallucinations of LSD.
Hallucinations are not
mysterious or supernatural.
Hallucinations are the nervous
system having experiences
for which we don't have words.
>> It's the dying process
of the psychological realm.
It's the kind of dissolving
of the perspective
from which you're standing.
That, to me, is one of the
things that's happening
while people are dying.
And then, I feel,
you're catapulted out
into non-conceptual space.
Is that the way
you're imagining it?
>> Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Brilliant.
>> So my sense of the continuity
of awareness beyond the brain
is just my wanting to
keep something going?
>> I don't have that.
>> I know you don't have it.
>> I'm curious.
>> You're curious.
I'm curious too.
>> I'm very curious.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Do you use the word "soul?"
>> Soul?
All the time.
>> Yeah, you've used it a lot.
What do you mean by it?
It's consciousness.
>> It's super consciousness.
And she hangs around the brain,
not the sole of your foot.
She's going to hang
around the brain.
>> Well, Ramana Maharshi
says it's right here.
>> In the heart.
Oh, the heart.
>> I've had to tell 1,000
Hindu gurus that the heart is
a wonderful organ to pump blood.
And they haven't discovered
Harvey's theory of circulation.
Ah, ha ha.
They're using the
heart as a metaphor.
>> Yes.
They're using heart
as a metaphor.
>> It's a very bad
metaphor, I think.
>> They're using the
lower right-hand corner,
the size of a thumb.
>> Are you kidding me?
>> No.
>> Wow.
>> It's the size of a thumb.
>> Yeah.
>> It's called the Hridayam.
And it's right here.
>> It grows there?
>> It's right there.
>> Naturally?
>> It's there.
It's there.
It's not in a physical
manifestation.
>> Oh, I see.
>> It's in a subtle form.
>> Well, how do you contact it?
>> Well, you've got to
get better technology.
>> Well, see, man, better
than LSD and better than--
>> Well, in LSD, you saw all
that, but it went by so fast,
and you didn't have a
model, a conceptual model,
to say that it
just went through.
Because so much went through
every time I took acid.
It must be for you too, that
what we have conceptualized
is the tiniest trivia of
the edge of the whole thing.
And that's why dying seemed
so fascinating to me.
>> Exactly, man.
>> Because you're going like--
[IMITATES WHOOSHING]
--like this.
>> You hope.
[CHUCKLES]
>> Huh?
>> It may not be that way.
I hope it is.
It's got to be that way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) You never know
what will be coming down.
>> Can you have dinner
with us afterwards?
>> I can't.
I gotta fly back
to San Francisco.
>> Oh, god.
>> I'm working against
a deadline for a book,
a deadline.
>> You go work against
a deadline too.
[LAUGHS]
>> How about that deadline?
Yeah.
>> Speaking of deadlines.
[LAUGHS]
>> Towards the end of May
1996, Leary began to show signs
of kidney and liver failure.
>> I think some of his fears of
letting go and not knowing what
was next--
I think that scared him.
And I think he was absolutely
normal and understandably human
in those moments.
But the process of dying
and actually slipping
into that unknown was
incredibly beautiful for him.
It was everybody else around
that was freaking out.
Ram Dass was really
mostly there for us.
It was the counseling
he was sort
of giving to us that was
so precious and meaningful.
It kind of got out of control.
We probably had too
many people around.
And a lot of us didn't
really know what we
were going to do once he died.
>> And so I was talking them
about not talking to him,
not trying to engage him,
not trying to pull him back,
but to let him be
wherever he is.
But they could talk
among themselves
in the room about all
the beautiful things
he'd done in life, which is
like an old Tibetan practice.
And I talked to them about
working on themselves
to not demand linearity,
so that, if he comes up
with things from different
places, to let their minds
soar so they could be with
him as his mind floated
through planes of consciousness.
And I told them to love death
as much as they love life,
to allow the mystery
of the universe
to be something
awesome and beautiful.
>> He was letting go willingly.
He wasn't trying to
just hang on, hang on,
even if the quality
of life suffered.
He was really going with the
organic nature of things.
>> We haven't really created
the right space for people not
to be afraid during this moment
that can be very frightening.
But as Tim Leary said,
I die so hard each time.
[VIOLIN PLAYING]
>> Timothy Leary's last trip
began early on May 31, 1996.
He was surrounded by
friends to the end.
>> Sometime in the last seven
hours of his life, he said,
compadre.
And then he said,
Esperando, I'm waiting.
follow, follow.
And then he said
beautiful, beautiful.
And then he said flash, flash.
Then he said the word "why"
in a deeply moving way.
Why?
Followed by an almost
mantra-like repetition
of the words "why
not," "why not."
>> Here in Southern California
, the Harvard professor who
became the outlaw acid
king of the 1960s is dead.
Dr. Timothy Leary advocated
the use of mind-bending drugs.
In recent years--
>> And there were 25 or 26
messages from CBS, and CNN,
on ABC, and da da da da da da.
And so I called "The Washington
Post," and I said, yes?
How do you feel about your
friend Timothy's death?
So I looked inside to see
how I felt. And I said, fine.
And there was this long silence
on the other end of the phone.
[LAUGHS] It was
clear that they had
written the material
already, and I
wasn't playing by the script.
He and I have met in
ideas and experiences
and intuitive being together
that is so deep that I can't
imagine that I will
ever think of Timothy
as not being present.
Timothy and I are explorers.
We're beloveds.
We're deeply connected
to each other.
And I can't imagine
that that will change.
Flicker.
>> Timothy Leary made
history one more time.
Fulfilling his
dreams as a futurist,
his ashes, along with those
of "Star Trek's" creator
Gene Roddenberry,
were sent into orbit.
It was the world's
first funeral in space.
>> There's no doubt at all that
I will be around after I die.
Think for yourselves.
Discover, explore, and
treasure your own uniqueness.
The proper study of a
human being is yourself.
>> Tim's right.
Go into yourself.
And then, if you go in deep
enough, there is truth.
And that truth leads
you to pick the people,
the beings with whom
you're going to spend
your life and your death.
If you have identified with
your soul when you're alive,
death is just another moment.
In ourselves, it's all there.
It's all there.
God is awareness.
So when we tune
into our awareness,
we close the space between
the individual and God.
You delve deep into the moment.
You come to all and everything.
One becomes the moment.
[ECHOING] One becomes love.
Life and death are one.
It's ecstatic.
It's like becoming God.
It's-- ah.
>> Richard, you have
enriched my life.
I'm sorry.
Ram Dass, you have
enriched my life.
>> No, I can be Richard.
Come on.
I'm Richard to you.
>> You've enriched
my life, Richard.
And I'm so proud of both of us.
And I thank you for making
this opportunity for us
to make love in public.
>> I think this has been great.
Yes, exactly.
>> 35 years, we've
been dancing like this.
It's been a hell of
a dance, hasn't it?
>> And we're totally different.
Not totally different.
>> So different.
So different.
>> It's great.
>> But at this moment, we
so appreciate each other.
Isn't that nice?
>> Big hug.
Here, I'll give everything.
OK.
Cut.
[MUSIC PLAYING]